Memorandum on Attempts to Prevent the Boipatong Massacre From: Nicholls, Cambanis, Koopasammy & Pillay INTRODUCTION Since the Massacre on the Night Vigil in Sebokeng in January of 1991,where 38 people were killed, there have been ongoing incidents of violencein the Vaal Area.These incidents are characterized by the fact that they are randominsofar as they are perpetrated against residents of the Vaal Townshipsin an indiscriminate manner. For example, numerous attacks by gun-wieldingmen have taken place at shebeens and stations where patrons and commutersare killed and injured indiscriminately.During the course of 1991 and 1992 it became apparent that the perpetratorsof these attacks were living in the Kwa-Madala Hostel situated in the ISCORCompound in the Vaal Triangle. Pursuant thereto, efforts were made repeatedlyto prevent violence emanating from the Kwa-Madala Hostel.The Boipatong Massacre could have been pre-empted if the South AfricanPolice, the ISCOR Management and the Goldstone Commission had acted immediatelyand effectively on receipt of the numerous representations to them aboutthe Kwa-Madala Hostel and the danger it constitutes for the communitiesof Boipatong, Sharpeville and Sebokeng.The South African Police have been negligent in failing to conducteffective investigations, after countless reports to them by the Vaal Councilof Churches of ongoing abductions, kidnappings, rape, assaults, intimidationand murders connected – to the Kwa-Madala Hostel.The Vaal Council of Churches, as recipients of complaints from victimsof violence perpetrated by residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel have consistentlyapproached the local police to investigate the individual complaints aboutviolence committed by Kwa- Madala residents. The police’s consistent responseto the approaches for assistance and action by the Vaal Council of Churcheswas that there was not sufficient evidence for them to respond. It is submittedthat the police are equipped with investigative machinery and it is theirresponsibility to gather evidence on receipt of complaints. The Vaal Councilof Churches as a result of their fieldwork, had concluded that a patternof random incidents of violence linked to the Kwa-Madala Hostel had emergedin the Vaal. This was a matter of great concern to them. They believedthat the police would share their concern and would accordingly launchand conduct a thorough investigation into the activities of the Kwa-Madalaresidents.The Vaal Council of Churches have consistently, since early 1991, attemptedto elicit the assistance of the police. The police have consistently failedto respond to the complaints and have neither conducted effective investigationsnor ensured that the perpetrators of the violence are arrested and charged.The police also failed to act timeously to prevent attacks by Kwa-Madalaresidents. It is submitted, and it will be shown in this memorandum thata failure to respond to the multitude of complaints about violence andintimidation perpetrated from the Kwa-Madala Hostel constituted acts ofextreme negligence on the part of the South African Police.In addition numerous representations were made to the ISCOR Managementto ask them to act decisively to ensure that they were not housing perpetratorsof violence in the Kwa-Madala Hostel. Again the Vaal Council of Churchesrepeatedly approached the Kwa-Madala residents. While the ISCOR Managementinitially appeared to accept the representations that the Kwa-Madala Hostelconstituted a threat to the safety of residents of the Boipatong, Sharpevilleand Sebokeng Communities, they subsequently denied and rejected the submissionsof the Vaal Council of Churches that acts of violence were planned andexecuted from the Kwa-Madala Hostel. It is perplexing that the ISCOR Management,despite reports of numerous incidents of violence perpetrated by residentsof the Kwa-Madala Hostel, adopted this attitude. It is submitted that theBoipatong Massacre could have been prevented if the ISCOR Management hadshown due concern to the ongoing requests for the Kwa-Madala to be closed,for the ISCOR workers living there to be integrated into the other ISCORHostel, the Kwa-Masiza, and for the remaining residents of the Kwa-MadalaHostel, believed to be the perpetrators of the violence, to be arrestedand charged.In the face of the negligence the South African Police and the reluctanceof the ISCOR Management, an approach was made to the Commission for thePrevention of Public Violence and Intimidation (The Goldstone Commission)to inquire into the violence emanating from the Kwa-Madala Hostel and totake steps to prevent further violence.In submissions made to the Commission, the Vaal Council of Churchesasked that the Commission investigate the closure of the Kwa-Madala Hosteland oversee the issues arising from this process. After the initial submissions,the violence in the Vaal escalated and the Commission was asked on twooccasions to act urgently to prevent further deaths.However, after a preliminary hearing, the Commission decided that itwould not appoint a Committee inquire into the violence emanating fromthe Kwa-Madala. It is submitted that the decision to ignore this requestis regrettable. Moreover, it is believed that if the Goldstone Commissionhad been in a position to convene a procedure to deal with the suggestionfor the closure of the Kwa-Madala Hostel, the recent massacre could havebeen pre-empted. This process could have been speedily implemented andfacilitated. It is submitted that if the legislation framing the Commissionand the mechanisms provided therein could not accommodate such a process,then recommendations for amendments to the legislation should be made.Following hereto are details of the efforts which have been made toprevent the violence emanating from the Kwa-Madala Hostel. Initials havebeen used at the request of the individuals concerned, who desire thattheir identities be withheld. HISTORY Field workers for the South African Council of Churches (SACC) (VaalRegion), Rev. Peter Moerane and the late Saul Tsotsetsi, since early 1991have repeatedly made attempts to bring to the attention of the South AfricanPolice and the ISCOR management that the Kwa-Madala Hostel has been a basefrom which attacks against residents of Boipatong, Bopelong, Sebokeng andSharpeville have been perpetrated.In the first half of 1991, the Field workers, pursuant to numerousreports that residents of the Kwa-Mazisa Hostel had been abducted by residentsof the Kwa-Madala Hostel, met with the District Commander of Police andwith Col. Steyn of the Security Branch in order to bring to their attentionthat the activities of the residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel constituteda threat and danger for the communities surrounding the hostel.The meeting was requested by the Field workers, in order to explainto the police that consequent to their fieldwork, they had perceived thatpeople residing at Kwa-Madala Hostel had been responsible for numerousacts of public violence and intimidation in the Vaal Triangle in the precedingmonths. At the meeting they outlined the incidents of violence and requestedthat the police undertake an immediate investigation into the unlawfulactivities of the residents of Kwa-Madala Hostel and take action to preventfurther violence. The Field workers were of the view that they had not been able to convincethe police of the dangers for the community relating to the activitiesof the residents of the Kwa- Madala Hostel and they held a joint pressconference with COSATU. They felt that the holding of a press conferenceexposing the activities of the residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel wouldexert pressure on the police to investigate and to take action to protectthe workers of the Kwa-Mazisa Hostel, as well as the residents of the surroundingtownships.After the meeting with the police in June 1991, attacks in the areacontinued to take place. The incidents of violence linked to the Kwa-MadalaHostel included: During the last week of June and the first week of July 1991, a groupof men went a number of times to the house of Ernest Sotsu, an executivemember of the Boipatong Branch of the African National Congress (ANC).They informed Mr. Sotsu’s family that he should report to them at the Kwa-MadalaHostel and threatened that should he fail to do so, they would take drasticaction.On the 3rd July 1991, an attack was carried out on his house and hiswife, daughter and grandson were killed and two grandchildren were injured.On or about the 7th July 1991, an attack took place at the Erica Tavernin Zone 7, Sebokeng. Two residents of the Kwa-Madala hostel were arrestedfor this attack. The Field workers of the SACC continued to receive reports from theresidents of Boipatong, Sharpeville and Sebokeng of violence and intimidationperpetrated by residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel. In addition to approachingthe police to intervene to protect the residents of the townships, theydecided to approach the Iscor Management.On the 15th August 1991, Rev. Moerane accompanied a delegation of womenfrom the Boipatong township to Mr. Viljoen, a manager of ISCOR. The delegationhanded to him a letter wherein they stated that they believed that theperpetrators of numerous incidents o in the Vaal were residing in the Kwa-MadalaHostel. They further stated as follows:“We want to know why are you insensitive to the use of the Kwa-Madalaas a base for dangerous weapons and attacks on human life?” They requested that ISCOR stop housing “enemies of peace and life”. ISCOR responded in a letter wherein they denied that violence is executedfrom the Kwa-Madala Hostel. They stated that “all allegations hadbeen thoroughly investigated by ISCOR and no evidence could be found toconvince management that the KwaMadala Hostel should be managed differentlyto that of ISCOR’s other hostel, KwaMazisa” .They, however, proposed a meeting to “exchange further informationand clarify our respective positions”. On or about the 24th September 1991 the Field workers met with theISCOR Management and attempted to establish a monitoring committee withthem. However, this process subsequently broke down.On or about the 25th September 1991, the SADF attempted to enter theKwa-Madala Hostel in response to various complaints about the activitiesof the residents. The SADF members were shot at with AK 47 weapons by theresidents of Kwa-Madala. The SADF thereafter shot and killed 5 residentsof Kwa-Madala.The Field workers of the Vaal Council of Churches continued to receivereports of public violence and intimidation perpetrated by residents ofthe Kwa-Madala Hostel, The abduction of J.M. and Sipho Mthimkulu on the 17th October 1991by residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel. They were taken to the hostel andheld there against their will for two weeks;On the 29th November 1991, P H and Sipho Mazibuko were abducted andtaken to the Kwa-Madala Hostel. P H was severely assaulted before he wasreleased. He identified Sipho’s body at the mortuary the following day;On or about the 8th December 1991 a number of young girls were abductedby residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel. They were held at the Hostel againsttheir will and raped repeatedly. During the period July to December 1991 and in response to the ongoingreports of violence received, the Field workers met with the DivisionalCommissioner of Police in Vereeniging on at least four occasions.They repeatedly raised their concerns that public violence and intimidationagainst residents of Boipatong, Sharpeville and Sebokeng emanate from theKwa-Madala Hostel. The Field workers reported that the response of thepolice at these meetings was that there was insufficient evidence for themto take action. On the 8th January 1992, and pursuant to reports of further abductionsof residents of the townships to the Kwa-Madala Hostel, the Field workersand the General-Secretary of the Vaal Council of Churches met with Capt.de Klerk and Col. Steyn of the former Security Branch in Vereeniging. Theyrequested the assistance of the police in securing the release of peoplebeing held against their will at the Kwa-Madala Hostel.In the week subsequent to this meeting, the police stated to the Fieldworkers and to the attorneys acting for the Vaal Council of Churches thatthere were legal constraints preventing them from raiding the Kwa-MadalaHostel. Col. Steyn informed attorneys Nicholls, Cambanis, Koopasammy andPillay that the evidence provided by the Vaal Council of Churches was notconcrete enough for them to take action against the KwaMadala Hostel.The request was made repeatedly between the 9th January and the 15thJanuary 1992 to the police to investigate the allegations of abductions.On the 16th January 1992 Saul Tsotsetsi was informed by the police thatthey had raided the Kwa-Madala Hostel, but had not discovered anyone beingheld against their will at the Kwa-Madala Hostel. 14. The Field workers continued to receive reports of incidents ofviolence during January and February 1992:On the 12th February 1992 a young boy reported to the Field workersthat he had forcibly been taken from the Mark Park Shopping Centre in Vereenigingby residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel. He, however, escaped.On the 21st February 1992 an attack took place at the Ha-hlo-ho-ya-peyeTavern in Sharpeville. Five people were killed by the gunshots and severalothers injured. The survivors informed the Field workers that one of theperpetrators was recognised as a resident of the Kwa-Madala Hostel.On the 15th March 1992, an attack took place at Chief’s Place Tavernin Sharpeville. Two women were killed and several injured. One of the perpetratorsof the attack was injured by one of his colleagues by accident. He hasstated on affidavit as follows:I am able to live at the Kwa-Madala Hostel without charge.I am unemployed, as are several of the other residents of the hostel. Weare supported by those residents who are employed. In addition, we receivefood parcels from the International Red Cross every two weeks. We alsorobbed people in town. We, as a group, approached individuals and threatenedthem so that they gave us money.” Although the Kwa-Madala Hostel is owned by Iscor, onlysome of the residents work at Iscor. Some work at other factories and,as mentioned above, the rest are unemployed. All the residents of the Kwa-MadalaHostel are members of the Inkatha Freedom Party. Amongst the residentsthere are individuals whom are leaders of the Inkatha Freedom Party. Amongstthem is one, Buthelezi. A system exists at the Kwa-Madala Hostel whereby eachresident becomes part of a ‘unit’. I was placed in a unit consisting offour members. I was trained in the use of weapons by Buthelezi. Every resident is trained in the use of weapons. I am aware that other members of other units were alsotrained in the use of weapons. I have seen many arms and ammunition stored at the Kwa-MadalaHostel. Meetings were held every Tuesday and Thursday. At these meetings,we were informed when new weapons had arrived. The arms are brought by members of the Inkatha FreedomParty, who arrive at the hostel from Natal. I have seen them arrive withAK 47s and spears with poisoned tips. Some of those who arrive come to the area to work. However,others come to carry out missions and attacks in the local township. Otherscome to bring arms and then leave. During the four months that I have lived at the Kwa-MadalaHostel, I have seen units being sent out on missions. However, l have notknown exactly where they have been sent to or what missions they have carriedout”. On the 15th March 1992, my unit was instructed by Buthelezito go to Sharpeville Township for the following purpose:to attack comrades who had been responsible for the killingof an Inkatha member, one Tlhola;ii. to attack two taverns, namely, Chief’s Place andthe Philadelphia Tavern. We were instructed to kill people there becauseit is known that comrades drink there.We were also informed that a secondary purpose to ourmission was to assist in the attack of comrades for the purpose of Inkatharegaining entry to the townships. We were given arms by Buthelezi. We were given two riflesamongst the four of us. I was not myself carrying a rifle. I moved with N. He was carrying a rifle. Between 8 and 9p.m and at or near Phomolong Section inSharpeville, we saw a group of comrades. Amongst them was one comrade knownto me as Ntopia. My partner opened fire and Ntopia was struck. We formed two groups. Two stayed on the ground and myselfand my partner went forward to shoot. Thereafter, we moved to Chief’s Tavern.K was shooting at people in the tavern and the gun jerked and that waswhen I was hit. I was carrying a rifle at Chief’s Tavern. N gave me therifle. As far as I am aware our second mission at the PhiladelphiaTavern was not carried out after I was struck and injured.In light of the evidence from Mr. X of a military style operation beingconducted from the Kwa-Madala Hostel, the Field workers became all themore anxious for action to be taken. Their requests to the police and theISCOR Management had been unsuccessful. Thus in March 1992, the Field workersinstructed attorneys Nicholls, Cambanis, Koopasammy and Pillay to approachthe Commission for the Prevention of Public Violence and Intimidation (TheGoldstone Commission) to request that the Commission inquire into the causesof violence and intimidation in the Vaal and recommend steps for the preventionthereof. Affidavits and Documents were submitted to the Commission on theirbehalf, which documents included a request to the Commission to take urgentsteps to prevent further violence from the Kwa-MadalaOn the 3rd April 1992, Adv. J J du Toit and a Colonel from the Commissionmet with Mr. X, to hear his evidence of the activities at the Kwa-MadalaHostel. Lawyers acting for the Vaal Council of Churches requested thatthe Commission urgently convene a meeting of representatives of ISCOR,the SAP, the residents of Kwa-Madala Hostel and residents of the townshipsto discuss the closure of the Hostel and the reintegration of residentsof the Kwa-Madala Hostel into the Kwa-Masiza Hostel and the surroundingtownships.On the 17th April 1992, two young men were kidnapped in Zone 7, Sebokengby residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel. Their corpses were identified bytheir families at the Vereeniging Mortuary on the 19th April 1992.In the early hours of the 19th April 1992, eight members of the Lefeidifamily were killed at their home at Vergenoeg in Sharpeville. In the affidavitof a survivor of the attack, it is averred that the perpetrators of theattack indicated that they were from the Kwa-Madala Hostel.Attorneys acting for the Vaal Council of Churches forwarded the affidavitsdetailing the above events to the Commission with a request for urgentassistance in resolving and ending the violence surrounding and connectedwith the Kwa-Madala Hostel. The request stated that the Field workers believedthat any further delay would lead to an escalation of the violence andto further deaths.The police were also approached and the affidavits were forwarded tothem.On the 24th April 1992, attorneys acting for the Vaal Council of Churcheswere approached telephonically by an Advocate from the Commission witha proposal that the Commission combine an inquiry in respect of the Vaal,Alexander and Soweto. The attorneys agreed with the proposal but referredthe Commission to the discussion on the 3rd April 1992 with the Advocatewhere it had been stated that steps to prevent violence in the Vaal couldbe taken almost immediately. It was further communicated that the VaalCouncil of Churches was concerned that the implementation of steps to preventfurther violence in the Vaal be done as soon as possible.On the 5th May 1992, a preliminary inquiry into violence in the Vaal,Alexander and Soweto was convened by the Commission.The Vaal Council of Churches submitted an overview of the Violencein the Vaal to the Commission. The following submissions were made in respectof the Kwa-Madala Hostel.“We are of the view that the Kwa-Madala Hostel is central to thereign of violence in the Vaal area. We request that the Commission inquireinto the assertion made by Mr. X that the Hostel is organised and run asa military style camp from where violent “missions” are launched. Myself and my colleagues at the SACC. believe that the steps to be takento prevent further violence is the closure of the Kwa-Madala Hostel. Werequest that the Commission inquire into the process and mechanism forsuch a closure. We understand that the process will require extensive discussionswith the respective parties. We also request the Commission to assist in ensuring that the perpetratorsof the violence be charged and brought to trial. This is particularly urgentin relation to perpetrators who have been identified as having been involvedrepeatedly in attacks. We also request the Commission to inquire into whether the police areempowered to conduct raids of the hostel on receipt of information regardingunlawful activities of residents of the hostel and to advise the policein relation thereto. Should the Commission find that in terms of currentLegislation the police are not so empowered, we request that the Commissionrecommend to the State President that Legislation be passed empoweringthe police to conduct such raids of the hostels”. I believe that residents of Sharpeville, Sebokeng and Boipatong havebeen looking to the Commission for a remedy for the end of the violence,since our initial request to the Commission in March 1992. I am fearfulthat any further delay will result in the loss of more lives”. On the 13th May 1992, the Commission issued a press release whereinthey stated that a Commission of Inquiry would be established with thefollowing terms of reference: To establish the circumstances in which people may have been forcedby violence or intimidation to vacate homes or hostels in Alexandra Township,the Greater Soweto Area and the Vaal Triangle;To establish the names and present whereabouts of such persons;To establish whether persons have acquired occupation of homes or placesin hostels in those areas in consequence of violence or intimidation and,if so, the circumstances in which they have come to do so;To consider practical and effective ways and means of placing the personsreferred to in (a) and (b) back into possession of their homes or placesin hostels;To consider whether the persons referred to in (a) and (b) are legallyor morally entitled to compensation for damages suffered by them by reasonof the foregoing circumstances and, if so: the amounts thereof; andappropriate sources of funding such compensation; To consider steps which should be taken to ensure the safety of personsin the position of these referred to in (a) and (b) and of their property. On perusal of the terms of reference, the Vaal Council of Churcheswere concerned that the terms of Reference of the Commission which hadbeen established would not necessarily include an inquiry into the dangerfor the Community emanating from the Kwa-Madala Hostel.They therefore submitted to the Commission that in their view, the problemof displacement is a secondary issue in the Vaal and that the central issueis the violence carried out from the Kwa-Madala Hostel. They urged theCommission to take account of the safety of persons who are victims ofviolence, but are not displaced persons. At a further meeting of the Commission on the 27th May 1992, the VaalCouncil of Churches again placed on record that they were concerned thatthe terms of inquiry would not include the question of the safety of victimsof violence perpetrated by residents of the Kwa-Madala Hostel.The Vaal Council of Churches are of the assistance of the police, ISCORManagement and the Goldstone Commission. They, on numerous occasions, expressedthe need for an urgent response to their ongoing representations to theabovementioned parties. They believe an urgent response would have preventedthe massacre which occurred in Boipatong on the 17th and 18th June 1992.The Vaal Council of Churches noted that the interim Report of the GoldstoneCommission recommended that all hostels should immediately be adequatelyand securely fenced and that a strong and efficient police presence shouldensure that no arms are taken in or out of the hostels. The Vaal Councilof Churches are aware that this recommendation was submitted to the StatePresident a considerable time ago. Once again, if there had been an urgentresponse to this recommendation, the massacre at Boipatong would have beenprevented. The closure of the Hostel however remains a priority. The State President should act immediately and effectively in takingsteps to achieve this. The arrest and charging of the perpetrators of the massacre and of theother incidents of violence is also a priority and the State Presidentmust ensure that all efforts are concentrated thereon. Dated at Johannesburg on this the 23rd day of June 1992.