To: Mr Nelson MandelaPresident of the African National Congress Dear Mr Mandela I acknowledge receipt of your memorandum dated 26 June 1992. However,an exchange of memoranda is no substitute for face to face talks. I wastherefore disappointed that you did not accept my invitation to immediatediscussions. Every day that is lost will make the resumption of the processmore difficult and may lead to the loss of further lives. Annexures A-F contain observations relevant to issues raised in yourmemorandum and elaborations on issues dealt with in this letter. Thereare however, a number of fundamental issues which need to be addressedurgently at a meeting between us. 1. VIOLENCE Contrary to the ANC’s accusations, the Government has not, and willnot plan, conduct, orchestrate or sponsor violence in any form whatsoeveragainst any political organisation or community. The lie that the Governmentis sponsoring and promoting violence remains a lie no matter how oftenit is repeated. Where elements in state structures err in this regard,the Government will not hesitate to take appropriate measures. There areprosecutions and convictions on record to prove this. The second interim report of the Goldstone Commission showed that thecauses of violence are numerous and complicated. The fact remains thatmost political violence occurs between supporters of the ANC and the IFP.This question must therefore be urgently addressed by the leaders of theANC and the IFP, and by the Government, in view of its responsibility forthe maintenance of order. I therefore propose that you, Dr Buthelezi andI meet as soon as possible for this purpose. The agenda for this meetingcould be to consider: an active full-time monitoring mechanism on the adequacy, efficacyand performance of all the instruments and processes already in place tocombat violence and intimidation; and the advisability of a joint monitoring body through which the threeparties could act to defuse and solve problems that could give rise toviolence. The role of the international community in an observer capacitycould be considered, especially in relation to this item. 2. THE ANC’S PROGRAMME OF MASS MOBILISATION The South African Government acknowledges the right of peaceful demonstrationand protest as important civil liberties. However, the ANC Alliance’s campaignof mass mobilisation, owing to its nature and aims, poses serious threatsto the stability and safety of the whole of South African society, particularlyin the current volatile climate. Furthermore, the use of this kind of mass mobilisation to make and imposedemands in the negotiation process is just as unacceptable as the use ofviolence for this purpose. Our information indicates that the SACP andCOSATU have played a dominant role in redirecting the ANC from negotiationsto the politics of demands and confrontation which are inherent in massmobilisation. Insurrectionist thinking is currently flourishing within the ANC andis being propagated by a cabal with close links to the SACP and COSATU.These elements undermine the attempts of many ANC realists to negotiatein good faith and also induce within the ANC the spirit of radicalism andmilitancy of the insurrectionist school, which was evident at the SACP’s8th congress in 1991. The ANC/SACP have been trying to create the impression that they andthe South African Government are the only adversaries. This is patentlymisleading and wrong since there are numerous players on the South Africanpolitical scene, each with an own identity but opposed to ANC/SACP policiesand methods. The ANC’s rhetoric has been radicalised and is now virtuallyindistinguishable from that of the SACP, and so are the ultimatum and polarisationpolitics now being conducted. In recent days this rhetoric has degeneratedinto incitement to violence and hatred at grass-roots level. The current mobilisation action can unleash forces which the instigatorswill not be able to control. This will, in turn, make extended governmentaction unavoidable. The programme of mass mobilisation, in the prevailingcircumstances, will inevitably: Iead to further violence; delay the search for democratic solutions; damage the economy, on which all South Africans depend; and seriously disrupt social services to the detriment of those in needof medical care, protection, support and education. The Government does not seek confrontation and has repeatedly statedits belief that negotiations present the only viable option for the solutionof our problems. However, it will not hesitate to take all steps necessaryto prevent the country from sliding into anarchy. Any change of governmentmust come about in a negotiated constitutional manner. The stated ultimategoal of the ANC’s mass mobilisation campaign is the overthrow the Governmentby coercion. This will not be countenanced. 3. THE ANC’S ABORTING OF THE NEGOTIATION PROCESS You say that you have withdrawn from the negotiating process becauseof the Government’s involvement in violence and its lack of commitmentto genuine democracy in the negotiating process. Your allegations about Government involvement in violence have alreadybeen dealt with. With regard to your allegations concerning the Government’s commitmentto genuine democracy, I should like to refer you to the substantial agreementsalready reached in the Working Groups of Codesa. The fundamental differencebetween the approach of the ANC and that of the Government regarding thepurpose of negotiations lies, on the one hand, in our commitment to constitutionalityand a transitional government as soon as possible; and on the other hand,in the ANC’s insistence on an unstructured and immediate transfer of powerbefore a proper Transitional Constitution is negotiated. Even after Codesa 2, our approach to transitional arrangements was againexplained to ANC representatives. Our proposals are in line with universallyaccepted democratic principles. A summary of our approach can be foundin Annexure “F”, and in Annexure “B” allegations thatthe Government is clinging to power are conclusively refuted. Once again, the remaining differences between the ANC, the Governmentand the other political parties on key constitutional questions make multi-partynegotiations more – and not less – imperative. 4. ANC”DEMANDS” In our view what you are presenting as demands are issues that are beingtailored by the ANC to support its programme of mass mobilisation and tojustify the abortion of the negotiation process. All these issues couldhave been suitably discussed at the negotiation table and it is imperativethat such discussions do take place to remove any misconceptions and misunderstanding.It should be recorded that some of these have already been dealt with byway of agreements, or have been dealt with by governmental measures. Annexure“E” contains observations in this respect. However we would like to comment in particular on the hostels and dangerousweapons. The problems relating to the hostels have been the focus of much concernand attention, but, as you are aware, it is an extremely complex situationand although extensive deliberations and consultations have already takenplace, much work remains to be done. This is therefore an issue that wewould like to be given particular attention at our proposed meeting. As regards dangerous weapons, weaponry and explosives measures havebeen taken and adopted regarding the carrying and possession thereof. Thesemeasures will be strictly enforced. Further regulations about the possessionand carrying of dangerous weapons are currently under consideration. The carrying and possession of dangerous weapons should receive attentionwhen we meet, but particular attention must be given to the implementationof measures relating to the illegal possession of firearms and explosives,and the introduction of such weapons into the country. The AK47 has becomethe symbol of political and criminal violence and firearms are the weaponsmainly used to kill political opponents and to perpetrate criminal violence.Ways and means must be found to ensure that this problem is resolved andwe must discuss this issue when the leaders of the Government, the ANCand the IFP meet. Until integral part of the problem of violence that itcan no longer remain solely on a bilateral agenda. I reiterate the Government’s commitment to peaceful negotiations asthe only way to bring us to a new democratic constitution as soon as possible.I repeat my proposal that we should meet urgently for fundamental discussions,especially on the abovementioned four issues. Yours sincerely  F W DE KLERK   ANNEXURE A THE CURRENT INFLUENCE OF MARXISM-LENINISM WITHIN THE ANC 1. Despite initiatives to become more independent, the SACP still hasa close relationship with the ANC, which not only enables its members toconstantly influence ANC strategy, but creates a climate conducive to radicaland militant thinking during a phase in which negotiation and reconciliationshould be a priority. In fact, the SACP lends so much support to initiativesto influenceand even transform the ANC, that it seems that its independentprofile serves only to draw attention away from its primary revolutionarystrategising role within the ANC. 2. It is clear that the SACP, COSATU and individuals within the ANCstill pursue outdated tactical communist doctrines and objectives. Thequestion arises whether the ANC is not becoming a captive of these forces.The SACP furthermore still regards a socialist system as only a necessaryphase towards realising an eventual communist system. It should be obviousthat these objectives and the prominent position of their proponents withinthe ANC cast doubt on the real character of the ANC. 3. There can be no doubt that both the SACP and COSATU were, in theirindividual and collective capacity, instrumental in a number of recentcrucial ANC decisions regarding the negotiation process. These decisionsfollowed intense deliberations between SACP and COSATU members and wereclearly the result of specific guidelines drawn up by the SACP/COSATU.The following examples are relevant in this regard: The ANC’s decision to implement a programme of mass action in orderto force the Government to meet certain bottom lines and/or to transferpower to the ANC. The ANC’s attempts to deadlock Codesa. The ANC’s decision to suspend negotiations notwithstanding oppositionwithin both the NEC and the so-called Codesa PF. 4. As South Africa moves towards a new democratic order, the strategyand policy of various revolutionaries within the ANC Alliance are increasinglyin conflict with internationally accepted norms. For example, to regardnegotiation in principle as a “terrain of struggle” underminesthe essence of the concept itself. In the final instance it gives riseto concern that the ANC allows these influences to flourish when theseforces are already committed to extra- parliamentary struggle against thenew dispensation that the ANC is propagating. This extraordinary approachunderlines the fact that revolutionary ethics generally overrule all otherprinciples, and are therefore incompatible with democracy.   ANNEXURE B PERCEPTIONS REGARDING THE NEGOTIATION PROCESS 1. When the process of negotiation was initiated by the Government,it was clearly stated that its aim was to extend democracy to the wholeof the South African nation. It was also made clear that a fundamentaland sincere policy decision had been taken by the governing National Party,fully endorsed by its supporters and many others, to remove racial discrimination,to abolish apartheid and to be instrumental in the establishment of a constitutionalstate in the new South Africa in which all citizens would be equal andjustice would reign supreme. 2. This approach will require a restructuring of government and societyon an immense scale. Hardly any sphere of life, any element of administrationor any aspect of politics has been or will be left untouched by the processesof constitutional change. It would therefore be irresponsible to advocateless than an orderly, albeit urgent, process of transition from presentstructures, administrations politics and processes to those of a responsiblynegotiated new dispensation. That is why, as a first priority, the Codesanegotiation process focused on transitional arrangements whereby thosenot now represented in government could become involved. 3. The ANC, on the other hand, has been advocating a sudden plunge,virtually without preparation, into simple majoritarianism. The Governmentresponsibly insists upon the replacement of the present dispensation witha fully functional and comprehensive Transitional Constitution providingfor proper curbs on the misuse of power during the sensitive period oftransition to an eventual constitution. It appears that the ANC wants toavoid proper checks and balances on a “Constituent Assembly”,which, according to a fair construction of the ANC’s views, will functionin a constitutional void after the destruction of the present dispensation.To accede to such a demand founded on revolutionary thinking would be irresponsibleon the part of the Government. The unreasonableness of the ANC in thisregard is the real obstacle to progress in constitutional negotiations.Further negotiation on the details of a transitional dispensation withthe purpose of extending democracy to all South Africans and to bring socialand economic stability to the nation, must be the priority of negotiatingparties having the well-being of all South Africans at heart. 4. Given the initiatives that the Government has taken over the pastyears and the structures created, financed and managed for the purposesof sober negotiation and the restoration of social peace, it is invidiousand entirely unconvincing to accuse us of attempting to cling to powerin an undemocratic manner. After all, we express our proposals for a transitionaldispensation in terms of power sharing and fully accept that such politicalparties as may be capable of demonstrating substantial support in a democraticelection, must not merely be present in the decision-making processes,but must also have meaningful influence under a transitional constitution. 5. The progress that was made in the various working groups of Codesais indeed impressive even in summary. Key elements of agreements whichwere endorsed by the ANC negotiators as well, include the following: “A climate for free political participation is an essential elementof the transitional phase towards and in a democratic South Africa”.(Working Group l Report, par 6.1.2.1) Political intimidation must be terminated. This means “any actionor set of actions committed by any … organisation … that is designedby the use or the threat of use of force or violence to disrupt or interferewith the legal rights of an individual, inter alia … the right of freedomof movement.” (Working Group 1 Report, par 7.2) A reaffirmation of the National Peace Accord. (Working Group 1 Report,par 10) “Political parties and organisations should have fair access topublic facilities and venues without discrimination”. (Working Group1 Report, par 14) ¥Codesa should draw up a transitional constitution. (Working Group2 Steering Committee Proposal of 13 May 1992) The Transitional Constitution should provide for a bicameral Parliamentelected by universal adult suffrage, proportional representation beingthe basis for the election of one Chamber; a multi-party executive; theseparation of the legislative, executive and judicial powers; a justiciableCharter of Fundamental Rights and the establishment of the boundaries,powers, duties and functions of a regional government structure and itsentrenchment in the Transitional Constitution. (Working Group 2 SteeringCommittee Proposal of 13 May 1992) ¥The establishment and detailed structuring of a Transitional ExecutiveStructure for the purposes of preparing the ground for the institutionof a transitional dispensation was fully agreed upon by Working Group 3. The principle of and some details concerning the re-incorporation ofthe TBVC states was agreed upon by Working Group 4. 6. The Government at all times made it clear that it was willing andeager to support and promote progress in the negotiation process, whereasthe ANC has lately derailed Codesa 2, reintroduced “mass action”to a tense and suffering society as a form of “struggle”, andis now making demands in a threatening manner apparently in order to coercethe Government into- irresponsible concessions that could not be negotiatedwith the parties in Codesa. 7. An honest analysis of the events leading to the present impasse makesit clear that the ANC is responsible for obstructing the negotiation process,which was progressing extremely well until shortly before Codesa 2. Itwould appear that the ANC found shortly before Codesa 2, that such progressdid not serve its political purposes, and therefore insisted upon drivingWorking Group 2 to a point where agreement to its proposals or none atall in the whole of Codesa was demanded. The ANC’s perception, it wouldseem, was that its purpose of an unqualified take-over of power would notbe served by the reasonable agreements in Codesa that were ready to besealed. 8. The Government firmly believes in democracy. We maintain that democracyentails universal adult suffrage and majority decision-making procedures.However, to suggest as the ANC does, that simple majority decision-makingis the sole essential feature of modern democracy, is over-extending thenotion. A far more fundamental feature of modern democratic states is theextent to which all citizens enjoy meaningful participation and fair representationin government institutions. 9. It is not democratic to attempt to deny meaningful political segmentsof society access to assemblies tasked with the determination of theirfuture. Furthermore the Government does not accept the ANC’s reductionof South African politics to a battle between Black and White. This reductionironically exposes the ANC’s approach to be founded upon outdated racialconsiderations. 10. The perception that the road to democracy is simple, is a dangerousone. The approach that mere majoritarianism is sufficient will not bringpeace to our land. It is the Government’s opinion that participation andrepresentation, and not majority domination, however structured, are thebuilding blocks of a democratic future. In a country whose human wealthlies precisely in the diversity of its population, the exclusion of significantminority political parties from decision-making regarding a matter as fundamentalas the terms of a future constitution would be courting disaster. 11. Modern democracy goes beyond the mere identification of the majority:it is equally concerned with the protection of minorities against possibleexcesses of the majority. Universally acknowledged constitutional mechanismslike bicameralism, regional autonomy (federalism), effective proportionalparticipation in government by all significant parties and enforceableand justiciable fundamental rights entrenched in the constitution, serveprecisely the purpose of curbing majority domination. It is significantthat the Government has been advocating these and the other elements ofthe constitutional state, while the ANC was prepared to derail Codesa 2on the grounds of rejecting such mechanisms of modem democracy which hadvirtually been agreed upon for the transitional dispensation. 12. A healthy and responsible administration constructed on the basisof the effective representation of all meaningful political parties andproviding for their participation in the process of government is surelyin the national interest. On the other hand, a constitution in which politicallymeaningful elements of society had no say, would in all probability leadto political instability of no mean proportion. The ANC seems to be benton such a disastrous outcome.   ANNEXURE C THE ANC AS A NEGOTIATING PARTNER 1. The Government believes that a sound foundation for at least a mutuallyacceptable process was laid at the Groote Schuur and subsequent bilateralagreements which, besides reflecting a clearly identifiable spirit, alsocontained the following: “The Government and the ANC agree on a common commitment towardsthe resolution of the existing climate of violence and intimidation fromwhatever quarter as well as a commitment to stability and to a peacefulprocess of negotiations” (Groote Schuur Minute). “Both parties committed themselves to take steps and measuresto normalise and stabilise the situation, within the spirit of mutual confidencethat exist between the leaders ….” (Pretoria Minute). “The right of the broad population to make their views known throughpeaceful demonstrations”. It was further agreed that violence and intimidation, from whateverquarter, that form part of mass action, should be eliminated. Further agreed that peaceful political activities and stability shouldbe promoted (DF Malan Accord). Despite these agreements and the spirit in which they were concluded,the ANC at regular intervals started using threats and ultimatums as partof its political approach, which from the start had a detrimental and erosiveeffect on the mutual trust that was beginning to develop. The ANC do havea bad track record in maintaining agreements and can be considered an unreliablenegotiating partner. 2. Therefore the decision of the ANC NEC on 24 June 1992, in collaborationwith its Alliance partners, to suspend negotiations, is viewed as onlythe most recent of a range of similar past decisions which further contributedto the creation of negative perceptions regarding the ANC’s approach tonegotiations per se and as a process. The perception that has beencreated includes indications that: The ANC is committed to negotiations only to the extent that its ownobjectives are served. The ANC readily enters into agreements but is not committed to supportingthe practical implementation of such agreements. The ANC is using extremely coercive negotiation tactics, includingultimatums, deadlocks, threats, reneging on agreements, and projectingunrealistic time-frames, etc, almost every time it becomes apparent thatgenuine compromise on a give-and-take basis is in the offing. 3. The South African Government remains responsible for the maintenanceof law and order in South Africa. It is however a truism, convenientlydisregarded in the ANC’s statements, that to disrupt law and order is simple,but to restore and maintain it with finite resources, is always problematic.Therefore the Government is concerned about the high level of violencein certain parts of our country. The Government regards existing bilateral(Groote Schuur Minute, Pretoria Minute, D F Malan Accord) and multi-lateral(National Peace Accord, Declaration of Intent) agreements as importantinstruments in preventing and curbing the violence and finding permanentsolutions to the problems facing South Africa. The Government endorsesthe contents of these agreements. Nothing will however be achieved withoutmutual trust existing between the parties. The ANC and its allies haveviolated these agreements, the following being examples: Paragraph 2.4 of the National Peace Accord states as follows: “All political parties and organisations shall respect and giveeffect to the obligation to refrain from incitement to violence or hatred.In pursuit hereof no language calculated or likely to incite violence orhatred, including that directed against any political party or personality,nor any wilfully false allegation, shall be used at any political meeting,nor shall pamphlets, posters or other written material containing suchlanguage be prepared or circulated, either in the name of any party, oranonymously.” In contravention of this agreement numerous inflammatory statementshave been made by many ANC leaders, especially in the recent past. Languagelikely to incite violence and hatred is constantly used. False allegationsare made and pamphlets and posters contravening these agreements abound. For the period November 1991 to June 1992, the ANC was responsible for186 recorded breaches of the National Peace Accord and the D F Malan Accord. 4. The ANC, by starting planning for mass action even before it becameclear that a deadlock might develop at Codesa, reneging on all WorkingGroup agreements on the basis that there was no agreement if all agreementswere not accepted, as well as suspending negotiations, cannot but furthercompound the already negative perceptions surrounding the organisation’sapproach to negotiations. 5. From these and other decisions and actions by the ANC, in conjunctionwith its Alliance partners, it can only be deduced that the ANC is indeednegatively viewing negotiations as an “area of struggle”, andeven as a battle in the “struggle” that must be won at all costs.If this is indeed the case, then it is clear that in the ANC’s currentview of negotiations there is no room for compromise, much less for mutuallyacceptable agreement.   ANNEXURE D VIEWS ON THE CURRENT VIOLENCE 1. The South African Government remains responsible for the maintenanceof law and order in South Africa. It does, and has been doing, everythingpossible within its power and within the existing political climate toaddress this scourge that has descended on our country. 2. The Government is however not the only role player in this regard.It is the responsibility of every individual, organisation, party and leader(whether political or otherwise) to strive for stability. 3.The appalling events at Boipatong on 17 June 1992 have once againshown that the situation in South Africa is highly volatile and accompaniedby a vicious spiral of violence and counter-violence. 4. The Government wishes to state categorically that, contrary to ANCclaims, the Government does not plan, conduct, orchestrate or sponsor violencein any form whatsoever, against any political organisation or community. 5. The time has come for the ANC in particular, but also for other politicalgroups, to recognise the fact that policies aimed at gaining a monopolyon power in themselves promote violence. 6. The Second Interim Report of the Goldstone Commission of Inquiryquite correctly stated that the causes of violence are numerous and complex.However the ANC has to date not acknowledged its involvement in violence,and as far as the Government is aware has consequently taken little constructiveaction to curb violence. As a matter of fact, the ANC is guilty of selectivequoting from the above report. It never refers to criticism of the ANCby the Commission but uses the Commission to put the blame for violenceon other parties. The Government takes a serious view of the criticismin the Goldstone Commission report, but expects the ANC to do the same. 7 The question may also be asked: to what extent does the ANC’s non-compliance with the various accords, in particular the National Peace Accord,contribute to the web of violence in which South Africa is entangled ?“On the other hand the Government regards the existing bilateral andmulti-lateral agreements, especially the National Peace Accord and theCodesa Declaration of Intent, as important instruments for curbing violenceand finding permanent solutions to the problems facing South Africa andits people. 8. The ANC’s direct and indirect involvement in the creation of a climateconducive to violence gives rise to the question whether the ANC was everfully committed to the National Peace Accord, in particular to paragraph2.4, which reads as follows: “All political parties and organisations shall respect and giveeffect to the obligation to refrain from incitement to violence or hatred.In pursuit hereof no language calculated or likely to incite violence orhatred, including that directed against any political party or personality,nor any wilfully false allegation, shall be used at any political meeting,nor shall pamphlets, posters or other written material containing suchlanguage be prepared or circulated, either in the name of any party, oranonymously.” In this regard the following statements by prominent ANC leaders arehighly revealing: Mr Harry Gwala admitted that the ANC is fighting a war and that theANC is killing IFP “warlords” and their associates (NatalWitness, 29 April 1992). On 26 April 1992 Mr George Mathusa (Chairman of the ANC in the WesternTransvaal) vowed that Bophuthatswana would be made ungovernable throughnecklace killings and bombs. Addressing people at a funeral service MrMathusa said: “In South Africa we did it through our necklaces andbombs, we can easily repeat it here.” (Cape Times, 27 April1992). In The Citizen of 23 May 1992 it is reported that Mr NelsonMandela said in Helsinki that President De Klerk was involved in the violencein which almost 1 000 people in South Africa have been killed this year.Mr Mandela told a news conference that it was a serious responsibilityto accuse a Head of State of fuelling the violence and the killing of innocentpeople, but that facts indicated that President De Klerk was involved inthis. In The Citizen of 25 May 1992, it was stated that Mr Mandela,in Geneva, likened the violence in South Africa to the killing of Jewsin Nazi Germany. On 16 June 1992 at the Dan Qeqe Stadium, Zwide, Port Elizabeth, MrHarry Gwala stated inter alia:“If the only way to our freedom is through bloodletting, so let itbe and if we all perish let that happen.” He said those who believedthe time for armed struggle was over were seriously mistaken, ….(EPHerald, 17 June 1992). 9. The Government recognises that the ANC’s suspension of armed actionon 6 August 1990 was taken in the interest of a peaceful transition inSouth Africa. Unfortunately, this has had no marked effect on violence.Since the suspension of armed action. numerous cases of MK involvementin establishing self-defence units and renegade self-defence units, aswell as armed crimes by MK members, have occurred. Numerous ANC arms caches– in violation of the provisions of the DF Malan Accord – still exist.For example 13 MK arms caches have been uncovered since 2 February 1990.Considering the well documented lack of discipline that MK members havedemonstrated, both locally and in foreign countries in the past, the Governmentmust inevitably ask whether the ANC still has any control over arms cachesand how many of the murder weapons presently being traded to the highestbidder, originate from ANC caches. 10. The Government finds it contradictory that the ANC’s answer to violenceis the formation of so-called self-defence units, which eventually becomeuncontrollable, as in the case of Phola Park. It is well known that theseself-defence units are themselves major contributors to violence. 11. Another urgent matter is the question of how many incidents of violencecan be ascribed to ANC members masquerading as members of the SecurityForces. Taking the two recent incidents in this regard into account, thequestion also arises whether actions such as these are official ANC policyor reflect a lack of control over ANC members. 12. The ANC owes the people of South Africa an explanation for the extremeforms of violence perpetrated against its own dissenting members in detentioncamps. Since South Africans were involved and since Codesa (Working Group1) has interested itself in this issue, all investigations and findings,notably the ANC’s own commission’s report, should be tabled – preferablyat Codesa. 13. The ANC’s history of violence, and its murder of innocent civilianmen, women and children, its barbaric extrajudicial “necklace”executions, the torture and murder in its detention camps and its totaldisregard for the consequences of mass action, remove whatever moral baseit may have had to point fingers at others concerning the violence. Mostof the perpetrators of the atrocities mentioned are still at large andthe dossiers are still open. 14. It is clear, in order to escape their own involvement in violence,that the ANC blames other political parties, the Government and the SecurityForces for the violence. What is particularly reprehensible is to blamethe State President – the very man who started the negotiation and NationalPeace Accord processes. 15. There is a clear strategy of discrediting the Security Forces. Thisstatement is made due to the following supporting facts: Complainants in criminal cases are often influenced by the ANC notto co-operate with the SAP. Unfounded allegations are presented as facts to create the perceptionthat the SAP, in particular, is biased and takes part in violent action. 16. In conclusion, the ANC has to account for its direct and indirectinvolvement in the more than 30 000 incidents of violence since February1990, and the murder of over 6 000 persons during the same period. Likewisethe ANC must also answer the question as to what extent its calls for attackson Security Force members in the 1980’s, and which have never been withdrawn,contributed to the deaths of over 90 members of the SAP in acts of violencesince January 1992 alone. 17. When is the ANC going to transform itself from a liberation movementto a conventional political party, and thereby shed its image as a violentorganisation?   ANNEXURE E THE DEMANDS OF THE ANC 1. How the interruption of the negotiation process can be brought toan end, how the demands of the ANC can be dealt with to achieve this end,and how the negotiation process can be structured so as to ensure progressand avoid similar interruptions in future, are matters that should be discussedand deliberated upon at the proposed meeting between the ANC and the Government.What follows are observations about certain aspects of the statement ofthe ANC on 23 June 1992, and of the Memorandum of 26 June 1992 from MrMandela to Mr F W de Klerk. 2. All the information at our disposal points inevitably to the conclusionthat factions within the SACP and the ANC were not happy with what wasbeing negotiated at Codesa and that they initiated, before Codesa 2, astrategy to abort the negotiation process by deliberately creating a deadlockand by reverting to the pursuance of their own goals by way of what iseuphemistically called mass action, but what is in reality physical confrontationalaction. This is our perception of what has happened and this is the onlyinterpretation that can be placed on “demands” backed up by threatsto completely destabilise South Africa if these demands are not met. Inour view, mass mobilisation and activation with the war-talk presentlybeing built into these can only be described as reckless given the existingclimate of violence. 3. A second leg of this strategy is that at the same time the ANC hasalso been using mass action and confrontational politics to mobilise supportwhen they registered that their support base was dwindling. This has beenhappening in spite of the ANC’s undemocratic and violent isolation of areasthey have taken control of, against all other political parties or viewpoints.They simply do not seem able to adjust to a democratic political processwhere the people are allowed to listen to the points of view of all theother parties and then to make up their own minds whom they would liketo support. We have experienced the violent excluding actions of the ANCand have been informed that these were not isolated incidents but firmpolicy. Many examples of such “no go” areas for other politicalparties can be cited. 4. Observations on Aspects of the Memorandum: 4.1 Par 1.2 to 1.5 (The Government is blamed for the crisisin the negotiation process and accused of minimising the crisis): The Government is not trying to minimise the seriousness of the situation.We are convinced that the ANC/SACP tried to engineer a crisis. What otherinterpretation can be placed on the withdrawal of the ANC from Codesa andfrom bilateral negotiations? That is how a crisis is created, not how itis solved. 4.2 Par 2 (The Government is accused of ignoring democraticprinciples and of trying to build a white minority veto into the politicalprocess and constitutional structures): The constitutional negotiation process leading up to the ANC-createddeadlock is dealt with in another annexure. What follows are examples ofinconsistencies in the Memorandum: 2.5 According to figures of the Development Bank of Southern Africaapproximately 23 million people will be able to vote in 1993 in an electionfor a constituent assembly/transitional government. Of those only 4 million(17%) will be white voters who will probably be voting for different parties.How can a 70 or 75% majority requirement possibly amount to a white veto? 2.6 Here the deadlock is attributed to the Government’s supposed insistenceon a minority veto (whatever that may mean); but the ANC itself is proposinga sixty-six per cent majority. There is therefore agreement on the principlethat a constitution should not be created by a mere majority but shouldrather have “overwhelming” support. 2.10 to 2.13 Here the ANC aligns itself behind the principle that constitutionmaking should be a unifying and legitimising process which should enjoyoverwhelming support. This is the guiding principle underlying the Government’sapproach to the process. This is why the Government wants as many partiesand interests as possible to be part of the constitution-making process.The product of the process, the new constitution, must be accepted andsupported by all; it should not be a constitution enacted by a majorityin a constituent assembly elected on party political issues. 4.3 Par 3 (The Government is blamed for all violence and [readwith the NEC statement accused of pursuing a strategy embracing negotiationstogether with systematic covert action, including murder, involving securityforces and surrogates): Nothing in this whole paragraph even attempts to support the bizarreand completely unfounded opening sentence of the ANC Statement. The wholeparagraph is blatant propaganda rhetoric containing factual inaccuraciesand distortions. Thus it is not true that the majority of deaths have beencaused by “cultural weapons”. There is also a distorted descriptionof police investigations, while the ANC itself has been intimidating Boipatongresidents from talking to the police. The ANC has also not once fulfilledits obligation under the Peace Accord to assist the police in their investigationswhen ANC members have been involved in atrocities. Compare this with thenumerous instances when the criminal acts by security force members wereinvestigated, prosecuted and punished. Apartheid is blamed for the currentviolence, while the ANC’s history of political intolerance and violenceand atrocities against mainly black political opponents over more thana decade is ignored. The difference is that the Government has rid itselfand the country of-apartheid but the ANC has not been able to adjust todemocratic political competition. 4.4 Par 3.3 (The Government is blamed for legalising the carryingof dangerous weapons) In terms of the National Peace Accord the parties agreed that no weaponsor firearms may be possessed, carried or displayed by members of the generalpublic attending any political gathering, procession or meeting. The Governmenthas subsequently honoured its obligation in terms of the National PeaceAccord by issuing the relevant proclamations after consultation with politicalparties, ie the ANC and IFP. On 28 February 1992 a prohibition was issuedin term of Section 2(2) of the Dangerous Weapons Act, 1968, prohibitingany person attending or participating in a political gathering at any publicplace to be in possession of any dangerous weapon which clearly includestraditional weapons. Other steps taken by the Government are as follows: On 19 March 1992 a further prohibition was issued in terms of the DangerousWeapons Act, 1968, prohibiting a person from being in possession of anydangerous weapon at any property of the South African Rail Commuter CorporationLimited. Objects, including so- called traditional weapons, which are tobe regarded as dangerous weapons, are explicitly listed. Various prohibitions concerning dangerous weapons were issued underthe Unrest Regulations in terms of the Public Safety Act, 1953. Provisionwas also made for an additional substantial prohibition with regard tospears. The Government is presently preparing draft regulations in terms ofwhich the possession and carrying of all dangerous weapons at any publicplace may be absolutely banned. As the need may arise these regulationswill be implemented in areas declared to be unrest areas. 5. The Demands In preparation for the discussion of the demands, the following observationsare made and need to be dealt with in such discussions: The Government will do whatever it can, without departing from itsprinciples and ideals, to get negotiations, both bilateral and in Codesa,on track again. Fourteen issues have been identified: Re the issues of a constituent assembly and an interim governmentof national unity. In Codesa complete agreement was reached on thebroad structure of transitional arrangements, including a transitionalexecutive council, an independent electoral commission and a constitution-makingbody within the framework of an elected transitional government. The Governmenthas therefore already agreed, in Codesa together with the other parties,to that which is now demanded. What the Government was not prepared toagree to was an appointed, as opposed to an elected, interim government.If there are any misunderstandings on these issues, the Government wouldlike to discuss these when we meet. Re the issues of covert operations, special forces, prosecution ofSecurity Force personnel and repression in Self-governing States. Thesedemands are introduced with a general demand that the “regime mustimmediately end its campaign of terror against the people and the democraticmovement”. This is a demand that cannot be met simply because thereis no such campaign of terror; and the ANC knows this. The Government ishowever agreeable to discussing once again the specific issues mentioned,but will also want to discuss the ANC’s own contribution to political andother violence and to explore ways and means of bringing that to an end. Re the issues concerning hostels. The Government is concernedabout the hostel situation and has therefore approved a comprehensive hostelstrategy. The aim of this strategy is to create humane living conditionsfor the hostel dwellers by means of upgrading the hostels or convertingthem into family units. The upgrading/conversion will however be basedon consensus reached after negotiation between the hostel dwellers, surroundingtown residents, the owners and all other concerned parties such as politicalgroupings, civic organisations, trade unions, employers etc. A peacefulresolution of the issue is therefore not possible without consensus amongstthe parties directly involved at local level. In its memorandum to theGovernment, the ANC attached a document dealing with the problem of theKwaMadala hostel an in which many allegations were made against a numberof individuals and organisations. It is clear that factual disputes willarise. As the Goldstone Commission is currently investigating the Boipatongincident, it is suggested that any findings concerning these allegationsbe left to the Commission. Re the issue of dangerous weapons. The carrying of dangerousweapons has already been dealt with but can be further discussed. The Governmentwould also want to discuss the application of measure to counter the illegalpossession of all dangerous weapons, including fire-arms and explosives,and ways and means of stopping the introduction of such weapons into SouthAfrica and of ensuring that such weapons are not used in the perpetrationof political and criminal violence. Contrary to the ANC’s allegations,these are mainly the weapons used to kill political opponents and to perpetratecriminal violence. Re the issues of international involvement, “political prisoners”and “repressive” legislation. Although grouped together bythe ANC, these demands concern three separate issues. two of which namely“political prisoners” and “repressive” legislation,have already been the subject of extensive agreement. These two can neverthelessbe further discussed and so can the third issue, namely ways and meansof arriving at the truth about the Boipatong massacre and other acts ofviolence; and ways and means of preventing such occurrences in future togetherwith the role the international community can play in this regard. Withregard to these issues the Government would like to elaborate as follows: International Involvement The Goldstone commission charged with investigating the Boipatong caseinvolved interactional assistance to assess and evaluate. The Governmentwishes to reiterate its abhorrence of all the events surrounding the Boipatongincident and trusts that justice will prevail in the shortest possibletime. At the same time the Government wishes to express its grave concernover newspaper reports to the effect that witnesses were instructed notto co-operate with the SAP in its investigation. Political Prisoners. The Government has fulfilled its obligations under the various agreementsresulting in the release of a very large number of prisoners. What is nowdisputed is the release of a number of prisoners who have committed commonlaw crimes such as murder and whom the Government maintains fall outsidethe ambit of the agreed definition on guideline for identification of politicalprisoners. Yet the Government (and the ANC) have agreed at Codesa workingGroup 1 that a task group consider the identification of such prisoners,and the definition of “political prisoners”. Apart from the above, the Government and the ANC have been involvedover a long period in bilateral talks on a number of issues identifiedas far back as the Pretoria Minute, which should and could be finalisedin one single agreement with a multilateral effect, including the disputedprisoners; the lack of indemnity for MK and senior officials of the ANC;the future of MK; and the arms caches. Ancillary issues such as the questionof treatment of former detainees in ANC camps abroad and whether such campsstill exist will possibly have to be addressed. “Repressive Legislation” Working Group 1 has made extensive unanimous recommendations in regardto security and emergency affairs at Codesa 2. The ANC’s inexplicable delayingtactics are keeping these issues alive. The Government can not possiblyabrogate its duty to govern and to take steps to reduce the level of violence,intimidation and crime. In this regard reference is made to legislationpassed recently in Parliament, pertaining inter alia to illicit traffickingin arms and ammunition, usurping police and military powers, violence andintimidation, drugs and drug related crimes. 6. In conclusion, withdrawing from negotiations, especially fromCodesa, cannot contribute to the resolution of any of these issues. TheGovernment is only one of nineteen parties in Codesa. How can the ANC justifythe deliberate wrecking of Codesa by putting demands to the Government?What better forum is there for putting its demands, if this is what itreally wants to do, than Codesa itself.   ANNEXURE F GOVERNMENT PROPOSALS REGARDING A TRANSITIONAL CONSTITUTION FOR SOUTHAFRICA  PRINCIPLES GOVERNING A TRANSITIONAL DISPENSATION The Transitional Constitution must be a complete constitution. The Transitional Constitution must effect the fundamental replacementof the principles of the current Westminster system with those of a ConstitutionalState. The diversity of interests existing in the South African communitymust be accommodated in the Transitional Constitution. The further restructuring of the second and third tiers of governmentmust be facilitated by the Transitional Constitution. The Transitional Constitution must satisfactorily underpin the maintenanceof order and stability. MAIN FEATURES OF A TRANSITIONAL CONSTITUTION The following are the main elements of the Transitional Constitutionproposed by the Government: A Parliament consisting of a National Assembly and a Senate An Executive Council directly elected by all the voters A Cabinet appointed by the Executive Council An independent judiciary, with judges being appointed by a non-politicalbody A justiciable Charter of Fundamental Rights Autonomous regional government Autonomous local government Special provisions regarding the following functionaries and institutionsin order to safeguard them against political manipulation: The South African Defence Force The South African Police An independent Auditor-General An independent Ombudsman An independent Commission for Administration The entrenchment of constitution-related legislation (such as electorallaws, laws concerning the courts and laws applicable to the Public Service)and of other laws such as those relating to existing pension rights andlaws regulating standards for public offices and professions. REPLACEMENT OF THE TRANSITIONAL CONSTITUTION For the amendment or substitution of the Transitional Constitutiona majority of 70% will be required and 75% for the Charter of FundamentalRights. If the Transitional Constitution has not been replaced within threeyears, a general election will be held in terms of the Transitional Constitution. The Transitional Constitution will be amended or replaced only withinthe framework of general constitutional principles as agreed upon at CODESA,and the Constitutional Chamber of the Appellate Division must certify thisto be the case. The following must, inter alia, be enshrined as general constitutionalprinciples: The autonomy of civil society, ie the exclusion of interference bythe state in the affairs of the civil society, such as sport, culture,professional life, religion. trade unionism and traditions. Democratic standards to which political parties must conform. The Transitional Constitution must itself also be drafted within theframework of the agreed general constitutional principles, including theabove. PARLIAMENT The National Assembly The Transitional Constitution will provide for a National Assemblyvested, together with a Senate, with legislative powers as well as thepower to amend and replace the Transitional Constitution by special majorities. The National Assembly shall be elected proportionally by universaladult suffrage according to the party list system. Senate The Transitional Constitution will provide for a Senate. An equal numberof members will be elected from each of the electoral regions that willbe delimited for this purpose, using the development regions as the pointof departure. Seats are allocated to a region in proportion to the partysupport in that region. Legislation may be initiated in the Senate and all laws must be approvedby both Houses. The Transitional Constitution will provide for mechanismsfor the resolution of differences between the Houses as well as for exceptionsin regard to specific subjects in respect of which the powers of the Senatemay be upgraded or downgraded (eg financial laws, laws relating to educationor specific regional matters). When the Transitional Constitution is amended or replaced, the boundariesof each region and its functions, powers and form of government will alsohave to be approved by a majority of the representatives from each electoralregion that will be affected in each case. REGIONAL GOVERNMENT There will be regional governments in the transitional dispensation.Agreement must be reached regarding the powers, functions and boundariesof regions and regional governments prior to the coming into operationof the Transitional Constitution. Should the process of the full establishmentof the regional dispensation delay the implementation of the TransitionalConstitution, the finalisation of the boundaries and the implementationof aspects of the system of regional government may be left to the TransitionalParliament. If some of the present regional authorities still exist when the TransitionalConstitution comes into effect, they will continue to exist for the timebeing; provided that a TBVC state may participate in the transitional dispensationby undergoing a transformation of status beforehand from independent stateto self- governing territory. The autonomy of regions will consist in their powers, functions andboundaries being derived originally from the Transitional Constitutionand will not be subject to amendment without the concurrence of the authoritiesof the regions concerned.